Add “How to migrate an iOS app to Bazel” blog post (#6112)
buildbuddy-io/buildbuddy: website/blog/how-to-migrate-an-ios-app-to-bazel.md

[objc_intent_library]: https://github.com/bazelbuild/rules_apple/blob/3.3.0/doc/rules-resources.md#objc_intent_library
[swift_intent_library]: https://github.com/bazelbuild/rules_apple/blob/3.3.0/doc/rules-resources.md#swift_intent_library

:::

[apple_intent_library]: https://github.com/bazelbuild/rules_apple/blob/3.3.0/doc/rules-resources.md#apple_intent_library

#### `apple_resource_bundle`

An [`apple_resource_bundle`][apple_resource_bundle] target generates a resource bundle.
Use it if you require certain resources to be placed in a named `.bundle`,
instead of directly placed in your top level bundle
(e.g. an `.app`, `.framework` , or `.xctest`).

:::note

`apple_resource_bundle` targets need to be listed in `data` attributes,
not `deps` attributes.

:::

[apple_resource_bundle]: https://github.com/bazelbuild/rules_apple/blob/3.3.0/doc/rules-resources.md#apple_resource_bundle

#### `ios_application`

An [`ios_application`][ios_application] target generates an application bundle.

Unlike Xcode,
Bazel separates compilation and bundling targets.
This means that an `ios_application` target
(which is a bundling target)
doesn't list its source files,

> and instead requires that its primary module be its single [static library](#swift_library) dependency

Reviewer: Perhaps a little odd to link `static library` to `swift_library` section here. Might be more clear to say:
```suggestion
and instead requires that its primary module be a single static library dependency, such as a [swift_library](#swift_library) or an [objc_library](#objc_library) (which is a compilation target).
```

(which is a compilation target).

[ios_application]: https://github.com/bazelbuild/rules_apple/blob/3.3.0/doc/rules-ios.md#ios_application

#### `ios_app_clip`

An [`ios_app_clip`][ios_app_clip] target generates an app clip bundle.

`ios_app_clip` is used nearly identically to [`ios_application`](#ios_application)
(since app clips are on-demand applications),

> except that it also needs to be listed in a parent `ios_application`'s `app_clip` attribute.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
except that it also needs to be listed in a parent `ios_application`'s `app_clips` attribute.
```

[ios_app_clip]: https://github.com/bazelbuild/rules_apple/blob/3.3.0/doc/rules-ios.md#ios_app_clip

#### `ios_extension`

An [`ios_extension`][ios_extension] target generates an application extension bundle.

Similar to [`ios_application`](#ios_application),
`ios_extension` defines a bundling target,
which means that it doesn't list its source files,

> and instead requires that its primary module be its single [static library](#swift_library) dependency.

Reviewer: Perhaps same comment here about static library vs. objc_library/swift_library.

:::note

Extensions are listed in the [`extensions`][extensions-attr] attribute of the containing application instead of the `deps` attribute.

> [extensions-attr]: https://github.com/bazelbuild/rules_apple/blob/3.3.0/doc/rules-ios.md#ios_application-extension

Reviewer: This link doesn't resolve to anything for me in Safari, that I can tell. Just the top of the doc.

This can enable workflows such as using dynamic frameworks for dev builds,
which has faster incremental linking,
and using static linking for release builds,
which has faster startup time.[^mergable_libraries]

[^mergable_libraries]: When **rules_apple** gains support for [mergable_libraries] this type of workflow will be a lot easier to support.

:::note

`ios_framework` is not intended to be used for distribution
(i.e. consumed by Xcode).
Use [`ios_dynamic_framework`][ios_dynamic_framework] for that.

[ios_dynamic_framework]: https://github.com/bazelbuild/rules_apple/blob/3.3.0/doc/rules-ios.md#ios_dynamic_framework

:::

[frameworks]: https://github.com/bazelbuild/rules_apple/blob/3.3.0/doc/frameworks.md
[ios_framework]: https://github.com/bazelbuild/rules_apple/blob/3.3.0/doc/rules-ios.md#ios_framework
[mergable_libraries]: https://github.com/bazelbuild/rules_apple/issues/1988

#### `ios_unit_test`

An [`ios_unit_test`][ios_unit_test] target generates a unit testing bundle.

Similar to [`ios_application`](#ios_application),
`ios_unit_test` defines a bundling target,
which means that it doesn't list its source files,

> and instead requires that its primary module be its single [static library](#swift_library) dependency.

Reviewer: And here.

[ios_unit_test]: https://github.com/bazelbuild/rules_apple/blob/3.3.0/doc/rules-ios.md#ios_unit_test

#### `ios_ui_test`

An [`ios_ui_test`][ios_ui_test] target generates a UI testing bundle.

Similar to [`ios_application`](#ios_application),
`ios_ui_test` defines a bundling target,
which means that it doesn't list its source files,

> and instead requires that its primary module be its single [static library](#swift_library) dependency.

Reviewer: And here.

[ios_ui_test]: https://github.com/bazelbuild/rules_apple/blob/3.3.0/doc/rules-ios.md#ios_ui_test

#### `local_provisioning_profile`

A [`local_provisioning_profile`][local_provisioning_profile] target defines a reference to a provisioning file that exists on the user's machine.
Use it when your provisioning profile is not checked into the workspace,

> as is per-user and/or managed by Xcode.

Reviewer: The portion after the `,` is sorta confusing. Is that what you're saying?
```suggestion
such profiles that are per-user and/or managed by Xcode.
```

If you have your provisioning profile stored in your workspace,
you can reference it directly with the [`provisioning_profile`][provisioning_profile-attr] attribute.
If your provisioning profile is instead stored in the default Xcode location
(i.e. `~/Library/MobileDevice/Provisioning Profiles`),
you'll want to use the [`local_provisioning_profile`](#local_provisioning_profile) rule to reference it.
Finally,
if you use Xcode's "Automatic Code Signing" feature,
you'll want to use the [`xcode_provisioning_profile`][xcode_provisioning_profile] rule as well.

[provisioning_profile-attr]: https://github.com/bazelbuild/rules_apple/blob/3.3.0/doc/rules-ios.md#ios_application-provisioning_profile
[xcode_provisioning_profile]: https://github.com/MobileNativeFoundation/rules_xcodeproj/blob/1.17.0/docs/bazel.md#xcode_provisioning_profile

#### Swift packages (SwiftPM)

An Xcode project can declare dependencies on Swift packages,
both remote and local.
The easy way to handle those dependencies with Bazel is by using [**rules_swift_package_manager**][rules_swift_package_manager].

**rules_swift_package_manager** requires all Swift package dependencies to be declared in a `Package.swift` file.

> So any dependencies declared in an Xcode project needs to be added to a new `Package.swift` file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So any dependencies declared in an Xcode project need to be added to a new `Package.swift` file.
```

```python
bazel_dep(name = "rules_swift_package_manager", version = "0.28.0")
bazel_dep(name = "gazelle", version = "0.35.0")

# swift_deps START
swift_deps = use_extension(
    "@rules_swift_package_manager//:extensions.bzl",
    "swift_deps",
)
swift_deps.from_file(
    deps_index = "//:swift_deps_index.json",
)
use_repo(
    swift_deps,
    "swiftpkg_arkanakeys",
    "swiftpkg_arkanakeysinterfaces",
    "swiftpkg_kanna",
    "swiftpkg_lightchart",
    "swiftpkg_mastodonsdk",
    "swiftpkg_mbprogresshud",
)
# swift_deps END
```

And now we can define our Gazelle targets in a root `BUILD` file:

```python
load("@gazelle//:def.bzl", "gazelle", "gazelle_binary")
load(
  "@rules_swift_package_manager//swiftpkg:defs.bzl",
  "swift_update_packages",
)

# - Gazelle

# Ignore the `.build` folder that is created by running Swift package manager
# commands. The Swift Gazelle plugin executes some Swift package manager
# commands to resolve external dependencies. This results in a `.build` file
# being created.
# NOTE: Swift package manager is not used to build any of the external packages.
# The `.build` directory should be ignored. Be sure to configure your source

> # control to ignore it (i.e., add it to your `.gitignore`).

Reviewer: Should this be added to the `.gitignore` on the branch https://github.com/mastodon/mastodon-ios/compare/develop...brentleyjones:mastodon-ios:bj/migrate-to-mastodon#diff-bc37d034bad564583790a46f19d807abfe519c5671395fd494d8cce506c42947?

    name = "update_build_files",
    gazelle = ":gazelle_bin",
)
```

:::note

Because of how **rules_apple** handles app icon assets
(though possibly because of a bug),
we need to [patch][rspm-patch] the **Tabman** package to not include test assets.
Our patches are defined in the `patches/swiftpkgs.yaml` file.

[rspm-patch]: https://github.com/cgrindel/rules_swift_package_manager/blob/v0.28.0/docs/patch_swift_package.md

:::

To generate the `swift_deps_index.json` file,
and/or update the `MODULE.bazel` `use_repo` stanza,
run the `//:swift_update_pkgs` target:

```shellsession
$ bazel run //:swift_update_pkgs
INFO: Invocation ID: f2427bde-865b-43b3-bd3c-6a8489387f00
INFO: Analyzed target //:swift_update_pkgs (148 packages loaded, 11707 targets configured).
INFO: Found 1 target...
Target //:swift_update_pkgs up-to-date:
  bazel-bin/swift_update_pkgs-runner.bash
  bazel-bin/swift_update_pkgs
INFO: Elapsed time: 1.724s, Critical Path: 0.07s
INFO: 1 process: 1 internal.
INFO: Build completed successfully, 1 total action
INFO: Running command line: bazel-bin/swift_update_pkgs
```

At [this commit][commit-rspm] Swift packages have been integrated for the Mastodon iOS project.

> [commit-rspm]: https://github.com/brentleyjones/mastodon-ios/commit/06c9d960622245ecf5add45692e3acf410ae5729

Reviewer: Perhaps a link to a Github issue for `# Work around rules_swift_package_manager sandboxing issue`, if it's not too much trouble.

load("@build_bazel_rules_apple//apple:resources.bzl", "apple_intent_library")
load("@build_bazel_rules_swift//swift:swift.bzl", "swift_library")

ios_extension(
    name = "WidgetExtension",
    bundle_id = "org.joinmastodon.app.WidgetExtension",
    entitlements = "WidgetExtension.entitlements",
    families = [
        "ipad",
        "iphone",
    ],
    infoplists = ["Info.plist"],
    minimum_os_version = "16.0",
    resources = glob(
        [
            "**/*.lproj/**",
            "**/*.js",
            "**/*.xcassets/**",
        ],
        exclude = [".*"],
    ),
    visibility = ["//visibility:public"],
    deps = [":WidgetExtension.library"],
)

swift_library(
    name = "WidgetExtension.library",
    srcs = glob(["**/*.swift"]) + [":WidgetExtension.intent"],
    module_name = "WidgetExtension",
    deps = [
        "@swiftpkg_lightchart//:LightChart",
        "@swiftpkg_mastodonsdk//:MastodonSDKDynamic",
    ],
)

apple_intent_library(
    name = "WidgetExtension.intent",
    src = "Base.lproj/WidgetExtension.intentdefinition",
    language = "Swift",
    visibility = ["//visibility:public"],
)
```

:::note

We are using [`glob`][glob] to collect our source files.

> This requires that none of the source files are unused.

Reviewer: I don't get what this is referencing. Maybe it can be reworded to make more sense to me/others.

[rules_xcodeproj-command-line-api]: https://github.com/MobileNativeFoundation/rules_xcodeproj/blob/1.17.0/docs/usage.md#command-line-api
[rules_xcodeproj-xcode-management]: https://github.com/MobileNativeFoundation/rules_xcodeproj/blob/1.17.0/xcodeproj/internal/templates/runner.sh#L148-L171

## Leveraging remote caching and remote execution

One of the main reasons to use Bazel,
instead of another build system such as Xcodebuild,
is to leverage its remote caching and execution capabilities.
For a detailed overview on both of those capabilities,
I recommend reading my [post on the subject][rbc-explained].

For this post I'll detail the steps I would take for any Bazel migration,
starting from no caching and ending with both caching and remote execution.

[rbc-explained]: bazels-remote-caching-and-remote-execution-explained.md

### Disk cache

Bazel supports a form of "remote cache" that uses the local filesystem instead of a remote server.
It's called the "disk cache" and is enabled with the [`--disk_cache`][disk_cache-flag] flag.

There are pros and cons to using the disk cache:

- **Pros**
  - Lower latency than a remote cache

>   - Includes blobs that have been built locally,

Reviewer: Perhaps link to some helpful `blobs` (or what blobs means in this case) documentation in Bazel docs.

We also used the [`--[no]remote_upload_local_results`][remote_upload_local_results-flag] flag to control uploading to the remote cache,
but in your project you probably want to use some sort of authentication and authorization method to limit this instead
(e.g. [BuildBuddy API keys][bb-auth]).

At [this commit][commit-rbc] a remote cache has been integrated into the Mastodon iOS project.

[bazelrc-config]: https://bazel.build/run/bazelrc#config
[bb-auth]: https://www.buildbuddy.io/docs/guide-auth
[bb-remote-cache]: https://www.buildbuddy.io/remote-cache
[commit-rbc]: https://github.com/brentleyjones/mastodon-ios/commit/2f5e6b60172061f5553500b018a6e0fcebad96d2
[remote_cache-flag]: https://bazel.build/versions/7.0.0/reference/command-line-reference#flag--remote_cache
[remote_upload_local_results-flag]: https://bazel.build/versions/7.0.0/reference/command-line-reference#flag--remote_upload_local_results

### Debugging cache hits

There might be times when you get fewer cache hits than you are expecting.
If that's the case,
I recommend reading ["Debugging Remote Cache Hits"][debug-remote-cache-hits] in the Bazel docs,

> which has information that will aid you in finding what the problem is.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
which has information that will aid you in finding the problem.
```

[bb-bes]: https://www.buildbuddy.io/ui
[commit-bes]: https://github.com/brentleyjones/mastodon-ios/commit/5d58ae9dc82f8b3c5004e0facedf39248646e112
[generate_json_trace_profile-flag]: https://bazel.build/versions/7.0.0/reference/command-line-reference#flag--generate_json_trace_profile

### Remote execution

Using a remote execution service allows Bazel to run actions on an external cluster of executors.
Because of the inherint latency involved in that
(e.g. network transfer and staging of remote input trees),
the remote executors need to be a fair bit faster than your local machine,
or your build needs to be "wide enough",
for a remote build to be faster than a local one.

Enabling remote execution after you have remote caching set up is as simple as setting the [`--remote_executor`][remote_executor-flag] flag
and ensuring that `remote` is the first strategy set in [`--spawn_strategy`][spawn_strategy-flag].
(which it is by default).
You might also need to set some default platform properties with the [`--remote_default_exec_properties`][remote_default_exec_properties-flag] flag to ensure that actions are routed to the right executors.

> We can adjust the `.bazelrc` file to have a dedicated `remote` config which sets `--remote_executor` and some default platform properties for an Apple silicon Mac:

Reviewer: TIL the "silicon" part isn't capitalized

It's highly recommended that you use these features if using a remote cache,
otherwise you might get a low cache hit rate on anything involving those binaries.
As long as you are using a version of **apple_support** and **rules_swift** that is at least 1.5.0,
these features are enabled by default.
Otherwise,
you can enable them with `--features=oso_prefix_is_pwd,relative_ast_path,remap_xcode_path,swift.cacheable_swiftmodules`.

:::note

When using these features you may need to [provide additional information to lldb][swift-debug-settings] for debugging to work properly.

[swift-debug-settings]: https://github.com/MobileNativeFoundation/rules_xcodeproj/blob/1.17.0/tools/generators/swift_debug_settings/src/Generator/WriteSwiftDebugSettings.swift#L121-L155

:::

[features-flag]: https://bazel.build/versions/7.0.0/reference/command-line-reference#flag--features
[oso_prefix_is_pwd-feature]: https://github.com/bazelbuild/apple_support/blob/1.14.0/crosstool/cc_toolchain_config.bzl#L2080-L2089
[relative_ast_path-feature]: https://github.com/bazelbuild/apple_support/blob/1.14.0/crosstool/cc_toolchain_config.bzl#L1747-L1761

> [remap_xcode_path-feature]: https://github.com/bazelbuild/apple_support/blob/1.14.0/crosstool/cc_toolchain_config.bzl#L1851-L1873

Reviewer: We should make the documentation of these types of flags easier to access, IMO. Work for the future!

Author: Agreed.

[swift-cacheable_swiftmodules-feature]: https://github.com/bazelbuild/rules_swift/blob/1.16.0/swift/internal/feature_names.bzl#L229-L238

#### Local performance

Bazel's implementation of [sandboxing][sandboxing] on macOS is slow.[^slow-macos-sandbox]
Because of that I recommend,
at least for non-release builds,
disabling sandboxing.
This can be achieved by setting the [`--spawn_strategy`][spawn_strategy-flag] flag to `remote,worker,local`,
and setting the [`--noworker_sandboxing`][worker_sandboxing-flag] flag.

The [`swift.use_global_module_cache`][swift-use_global_module_cache-feature] feature in **rules_swift** sets the Swift module cache to a fixed location,
allowing it to be reused by multiple compilations.
This can result in up to 10 times faster compilations.
As long as you are using a version of **rules_swift** that is at least 1.5.0,
this feature is enabled by default.
Otherwise,
you can enable it with `--features=swift.use_global_module_cache`.

Bazel calculates digests of all input and output files,
in order to determine when actions need to be rerun.
By default it uses the [SHA-256][sha256] hash function to calculate these digests.

> Since version 6.4.0 Bazel now supports using the [BLAKE3][blake3] hash fucntion instead,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since version 6.4.0 Bazel now supports using the [BLAKE3][blake3] hash function instead,
```

and build event service
usage.

The [`--experimental_remote_cache_async`][remote_cache_async-flag] flag allows execution of actions that don't depend on the output of a given action to start before the outputs of that action finish uploading.
That's a lot of words to say that uploading of outputs becomes as asynchronous as possible,
while still blocking dependent actions from starting.
The `bazel` command will also block at the end of a build while it waits for all uploads to finish.

Similarly,
setting the [`--bes_upload_mode`][bes_upload_mode-flag] flag to `nowait_for_upload_complete` will prevent the `bazel` command from blocking at the end of a build while it uploads to a build event service.
If another build starts while uploads are still happening in the background,
that build will wait to start until the previous uploads finish.
You can have previous uploads cancelled rather than delay a build by using a value of `fully_async` instead.

Speaking of BES related flags,
if your build event service isn't [ResultStore][resultstore]
(e.g. BuildBuddy),
you should set [`--nolegacy_important_outputs`][legacy_important_outputs-flag] to reduce the size of the uploaded events.

> The [`--remote_cache_compression`][remote_cache_compression-flag] flag causes Bazel to compresses uploads and decompress downloads with the [zstd][zstd] algorithm.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [`--remote_cache_compression`][remote_cache_compression-flag] flag causes Bazel to compress uploads and decompress downloads with the [zstd][zstd] algorithm.
```

This reduces the average number of bytes transferred by around 70%,
which for some projects has resulted in a 45% faster overall build time.

Some types of actions we shouldn't remotely cache or build.
We can tell Bazel about that by using the [`--modify_execution_info`][modify_execution_info-flag] flag.

> The **rules_apple** documentation has a [nice explaination][rules_apple-modify_execution_info] on what value you should set that flag to.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The **rules_apple** documentation has a [nice explaination][rules_apple-modify_execution_info] on the suggested value for this flag.
```
